JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: more
raids and
arrests in Brussels. We're on
the ground as
police and intelligence services
try to track
down the terrorists.
And there is a war of words
between the two
leading Republican presidential
candidates.
It's Friday. Mark Shields and
David Brooks
are here to analyze the week's
news.
Plus, we head to Kentucky, where
promising
programs help fight and prevent
cancer among
the poor.
TOM COLLINS, Rural Prevention
Cancer Center:
The challenge is educating them
that they
can do something about it, and
that I can
help them do something about it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: This was the
third and final
day of official mourning in
Belgium for victims
of the Islamic State attacks in
Brussels.
And there was confirmation that
two Americans
were among the 31 dead. That
word came as
raids spread across the Belgian
capital.
Malcolm Brabant has our
coverage, from Brussels.
MALCOLM BRABANT: One raid
centered on this
residential neighborhood, where
police suited
up in bomb disposal outfits to
enter two apartments.
State TV reported two
explosions. Cell phone
footage also showed a raid on a
bus stop,
where a suspect was believed to
be carrying
a suitcase filled with
explosives. He was
shot in the leg and arrested.
MAN: He was sitting at the bus
stop with his
daughter. And after that, two
cars, two special
cars from the police coming, and
they told
him to stop. He tried to do
something, boom,
boom, two shots.
MALCOLM BRABANT: All told, there
were three
daytime arrests across the city,
in addition
to seven others overnight. All
this follows
Tuesday's suicide attacks on the
Brussels
airport and the Molenbeek metro
station. They
came within days of police raids
in the Molenbeek
neighborhood last week that led
to the capture
of Paris attacker Salah
Abdeslam.
Some of today's activity
happened in the nearby
Schaerbeek neighborhood, where
three days
ago police also found a large
stash of explosives.
Meanwhile, Belgium's nuclear
plants added
security and withdrew entry
badges from some
staff amid concern the plants
could become
terror targets.
Investigators also named a new
suspect, 28-year-old
Syrian Naim al-Hamed. They now
believe he
had some role in Tuesday's
assault. The attacks
underscore the intelligence
challenges across
Europe with 28 countries in the
European Union,
each with its own security
services, and communication
among them muddled.
Claude Moniquet is a former
French spy, and
head of a security consultancy,
the European
Strategic Intelligence and
Security Center.
CLAUDE MONIQUET, European
Strategic Intelligence
and Security Center: The
services, police
and intelligence, are
overwhelmed by a threat
which is not sized to Europe. We
are facing
thousands, thousands of possible
potential
terrorists. At the time of
al-Qaida, for instance,
we were facing maybe 500 to
1,000 people in
Europe, and it was already
considered a very
hard threat. Today, we have at
least 10 times
more people to confront and to
survey.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But how does
the West counter
the appeal of the Islamic State
amongst young
Muslims? Moroccan-born Rachid
Benzine is a
professor of Islamic studies. He
says European
governments must strive harder
to help them
integrate and give them a sense
of belonging.
RACHID BENZINE, Professor of
Islamic Studies
(through translator): Our young
people are
not being radicalized in
mosques. The phenomenon
of radicalization is taking
place within the
family unit and with their
friends and peers.
We need to provide them with the
tools so
that our young people are
sufficiently armed
against the ideology facing us,
because if
you don't fully integrate young
people, their
imagination will automatically
create a symbolic
identity, and people can die for
that.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Such concerns
were in the
air today as Secretary of State
John Kerry
arrived in Belgium to meet with
Prime Minister
Charles Michel on defeating
ISIS.
CHARLES MICHEL, Belgian Prime
Minister (through
translator): With John Kerry to
discuss the
fight against terrorism, how is
it possible
to do better, how is it possible
to work together
in order to be more efficient?
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: We will
not rest until we have
eliminated your nihilistic
beliefs and cowardice from the
face of this
earth.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Later, Kerry
placed a wreath
of flowers at a makeshift
memorial for the
victims at Brussels Airport.
And at Bourse Plaza, which has
also become
a memorial site, the Brussels
Philharmonic
played an impromptu tribute
today to the victims.
The Flemish Radio Choir joined
them to finish
with a performance of
Beethoven's "Ode to
Joy," a European anthem, and a
hymn of hope
for the future.
Away from Brussels, police in
neighboring
countries are on the move. In
France, the
authorities say that a man
arrested there
was in the advanced stages of
plotting a new
strike and had ties to the
ringleader of Paris'
attacks last November. And in
Germany, authorities
are questioning two people who
have potential
links to the Brussels operation
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Malcolm Brabant
in Brussels
tonight, thank you.
The U.S. military is claiming
new kills in
the war on Islamic State
leaders. Pentagon
leaders announced today that
attacks this
week killed several senior
figures. One was
Haji Imam, identified as the
group's finance
minister. Officials say it
happened in a raid
in Syria. We will take a closer
look at the
war on ISIS after the news
summary.
Heavy fighting raged for a third
day, as government
troops fought to retake Palmyra
from ISIS.
The army and its militia allies
seized an
ancient citadel, backed by
Russian air support.
Capturing Palmyra could open
much of Eastern
Syria to government forces, but
large parts
of the town remain under the
militants' control.
Meanwhile, in Iraq a suicide
bomber killed
29 people at a soccer match
south of Baghdad.
At least 60 others were wounded.
There was
no immediate claim of
responsibility.
A Korean-American arrested in
North Korea
confessed today to stealing
military secrets.
State television showed Kim Dong
Chul at a
news conference in Pyongyang.
The 62-year-old
was arrested last October.
Today, he tearfully
admitted to spying for the U.S.
and South
Korea.
KIM DONG CHUL, Detained
Korean-American (through
translator): The extraordinary
crime I committed
was defaming and insulting the
republic's
highest dignity and its system,
and spreading
false propaganda aimed at
breaking down its
solidarity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Earlier this
month, North Korea
sentenced Otto Warmbier, an
American college
student, to 15 years for trying
to steal a
propaganda banner.
Much of the Christian world
marked Good Friday
today. In Jerusalem's Old City,
thousands
walked the Way of the Cross.
It's the route
that, according to tradition,
Jesus took to
his crucifixion. Later, Pope
Francis led Good
Friday services at the Vatican.
Hundreds of
worshipers filled St. Peter's
Basilica.
And in the Philippines, some of
the faithful
had themselves nailed to
crosses, including
one who did it for the 30th
year. Thousands
of tourists looked on and took
pictures.
And TV writer Earl Hamner Jr.
has died of
pneumonia in Los Angeles. He was
best known
for creating "The Waltons,"
based on his own
upbringing in Virginia's Blue
Ridge Mountains.
It ran for nine seasons,
starting in 1972,
and won 12 Emmys. Earl Hamner
Jr. was 92 years
old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how the U.S.
is fighting ISIS; Mark Shields
and David Brooks
take on this week's news;
beating cancer in
one of America's poorest
communities; from
groups of white supremacists to
lone wolves,
exploring a racist undercurrent
in the United
States; and much more.
Secretary of Defense Ash Carter
and the chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
General Joe
Dunford, spoke this morning at
the Pentagon
about the fight against the
Islamic State.
While hailing operations to kill
top ISIS
leaders like the one we reported
earlier,
they sought to put the longer
war in context.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: There's
no question that this individual
and other
individuals we have eliminated
have been part
of the apparatus of ISIL to
recruit and to
motivate foreign fighters, both
to return
from Iraq and Syria to countries
in Europe
and elsewhere, and also simply
by using the
Internet and other
communications to do so.
Even if it's just inspiration,
it still takes
you back to Iraq and Syria and
the need to
eliminate the sources of that
inspiration.
GEN. JOSEPH DUNFORD, Joint
Chiefs of Staff
Chairman: While ISIL has not
been able to
seize ground in the past several
months, that
hasn't precluded them from
conducting terrorist
attacks, and it hasn't precluded
them from
conducting operations that are
more akin to
guerrilla operations than the
conventional
operations that we saw when they
were seizing
territory.
So, I think the momentum is in
our favor.
I think there's a lot of reasons
for us to
be optimistic about the next
several months.
But by no means would I say that
we're about
to break the back of ISIL or
that the fight
is over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dunford and
Carter also spoke
of expanding the role of U.S.
Marines in Northern
Iraq and the possibility of
sending more forces
in the coming weeks, adding to
the nearly
4,000 already there.
We examine the state of the
fight against
ISIS now with retired Army
Colonel Derek Harvey.
He was an intelligence officer
and special
adviser to the commander of U.S.
forces in
Iraq, General David Petraeus.
He's now a professor
at the University of South
Florida. And Brendan
Koerner is a contributing editor
at "Wired"
magazine. He's the author of an
upcoming article
about ISIS and its use of social
media.
And we welcome you both to the
program.
Colonel Harvey, to you first.
How important
was this number two figure at
ISIS who we
have been talking about who has
evidently
been killed by U.S. forces?
COL. DEREK HARVEY (RET.), U.S.
Army: Well,
Judy, I usually don't get very
excited about
taking out a senior leader
through the decapitation
strategy, but Haji Imam is a
very important
person, for one particular
reason.
It's not just that he's number
two, but he
connects the Islamic State to
key core al-Qaida
senior leaders, operatives at
that level.
Plus, he is closely tied in and
historically
was tied in with the order of
the Naqshbandi
army, Izzat al-Douri's
insurgency wing from
the former regime days. Those
entities...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meaning Saddam
Hussein.
COL. DEREK HARVEY: Saddam
Hussein's former
vice president, and he was an
architect of
the original insurgency back in
2003 and 2004
before becoming part of al-Qaida
in Iraq with
Zarqawi.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, by
eliminating him, assuming
he's been killed, and the other
ISIS leadership
the U.S. says has been
eliminated, where does
that leave the state of the
fight against
ISIS in Iraq and Syria?
COL. DEREK HARVEY: I still -- I
think it's
a very bleak picture, because
what we have
had to do is destroy urban
centers, Sunni
Arab cities in order to clear
those areas
of the Islamic State, Ramadi,
Tikrit, Baiji,
those types.
And we're probably going to wind
up doing
the same in Mosul. And the
humanitarian issues,
the fallout, the civil war, the
core issues
have not been addressed yet.
It's necessary
to go after the Islamic State
militarily,
but there is so much more to do
and it's still
very bleak.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Derek Harvey, one
more question.
Secretary of State John Kerry
was saying today
in Europe -- he essentially that
because ISIS
is losing ground in Iraq and
Syria that they're
lashing out in Europe.
He said they're resorting to
actions outside
the Middle East because their
fantasy of a
caliphate is collapsing.
COL. DEREK HARVEY: I think
that's just plain
wrong.
The Islamic State has for two
years been talking
in their speeches and in their
communications
about conducting operations in
Europe and
elsewhere. This wasn't a lashing
out. This
is part of their normal
operational profile.
And we are going to see more of
it, particularly
as we see these foreign fighters
move back
to areas around the world, not
just just Europe,
but North Africa and Asia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Brendan
Koerner, when
it comes to these foreign
fighters, we know
that the -- certainly one of the
main ways
ISIS appeals to them and tries
to recruit
fighters is using social media.
And you have done a lot of
reporting and research
on that. You wrote that -- you
said it's as
much a -- that ISIS is as much
as a media
conglomerate as it is a fighting
force. What
do you mean by that?
BRENDAN KOERNER, "Wired": Well,
I think it
goes back to its earliest days
back in 2004,
when it was really just a rogue
al-Qaida offshoot
in Iraq.
They understood the value of
pushing out content,
specifically videos of
atrocities, into the
world. Therefore, they could
recruit very
brutal young men to come join
their struggle.
As the organization evolved, it
made media
very central to its ideology and
to its organization.
It now has many different media
offices which
all manufacture content it
pushes out through
social media to every corner of
the world
tailored to specific audiences,
whether it
be in the Balkans, in Chechnya
or in the Western
world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Give us an
example, Brendan
Koerner, of how that works. I
know there's
been a lot of reporting about
this over many
months, but in your reporting,
what did you
find?
And I was struck you also wrote
that -- quote
-- "They have a cockroach-like
resilience."
Explain what you mean by that.
BRENDAN KOERNER: Well,
certainly, on social
media, the supporters of the
Islamic State
who are really from all over the
world are
often expelled from social
networks for their
speech.
And yet within hours usually of
being booted
from Twitter or Facebook, or
what have you,
they're right back at it.
They're registering
new accounts, they're using
false identities,
false cell phones to get back
on. So they're
hard to stamp out in
disseminating their messages.
I also found on a story that I
wrote for "Wired"
that the atrocities that we see
in many videos,
that is a very small personally
of what Islamic
State's media operation
manufactures. What
they're really good at is making
videos that
portray the so-called caliphate
they're building
in Syria and Iraq and elsewhere
as kind of
a paradise, a place where people
can bring
their spouses and families and
flourish and
practice what they say is true
Islam.
It's very effective content for
young men.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what's the
best way for
the West, for the United States
to counter
this?
BRENDAN KOERNER: Well, I don't
think it is
just focusing our efforts
exclusively on tamping
down speech.
I think it's in creating better
speech. For
example, the Islamic State is
clearly frightened
by the outflow of refugees. We
have seen a
lot of media created that
excoriates those
who flee from these territories.
I think we
need to take advantage of those
refugees,
give them the tools to make
their own content
to tell their stories to the
world. That is
going to be the best salve
against what the
Islamic State's media is putting
out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Derek Harvey,
Colonel Harvey,
how much does it matter that
progress is made
against ISIS in the social media
realm, this
media conglomerate realm that
Mr. is Koerner
describing?
COL. DEREK HARVEY: I think it's
very important
in order to tamp down the
prospects for the
lone wolves as well as the
recruitment and
the finances that flow into this
Islamic State
organization. But I think, you
know, to pivot
off his comments, al Qaeda in
Iraq and other
jihadist groups are framing
their position
as a more moderateñ jihadism,
and they are
actively recruiting in Syria and
Iraq, but
in Turkey in the refugee camps,
in Jordan,
and now into Europe.
And they are framing their
narrative in a
way that we can have the fight
without the
brutality and the extremism. And
so they're
well-positioned to be, youñr
know, al-Qaida
4.0 after the end of this, once
ISIS is attrited,
unless we really go after the
core issues.
And I don't see enough effort in
addressing
the two civil wars and this
conflict within
Islam.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you see that
as a threat
as well, Brendan Koerner, this
idea that they
keep appealing to the peaceful,
the pleasant
side of what they say will be
the future under
their rule?
BRENDAN KOERNER: Well, clearly,
the agility
of the Islamic State's media is
one of its
trademarks, the fact that they
can respond
to current circumstances and
shift their message.
And they have done that very
effectively.
You can see right now, clearly,
Libya is becoming
a new front in the struggle
against the Islamic
State. And they have been very
good about
producing media surrounding its
Libyan ventures,
trying to portray that area as a
place where
people can now emigrate to and
participate
in the struggle for this
caliphate.
So I think we need to be very,
very fast about
the way we address this
situation because
they're clearly one step ahead
of us right
now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, many alarm
bells out
of this conversation, even as
there is progress
being made on theñ battlefield.
Brendan Koerner, we thank you.
Colonel Derek
Harvey, thank you.
COL. DEREK HARVEY: Thank you,
Judy.
BRENDAN KOERNER: Thank you so
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, for another
look at the
war against ISIS and the battles
on the presidential
campaign trail, the analysis of
Shields and
Brooks. That's syndicated
columnist Mark Shields
and New York Times columnist
David Brooks.
Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
So, let's pick up from where we
were in that
conversation we just heard.
Mark, they did -- you did have
this successful
capture, killing of this top
ISIS leader and
another one recently on the
battlefield, but
in the wake of these Brussels
attacks, growing
chorus of criticism that the
Obama administration
is not doing enough to go after
ISIS, that
you're still seeing horrible
attacks like
the ones in Belgium.
Where do you -- how do you
assess the administration?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, the
administration has
taken on ISIS, its caliphate,
that is, in
Syria and Iraq, and I think it's
fair to say
that they're in retreat.
The problem is Europe. I mean,
that's a problem.
It's a soft target. It's free
and easy access.
And these are homegrown
terrorists here. And
what the United States can do is
to encourage
and urge and push for the
sharing of information.
But there is a whole inequality
of quality
of intelligence in those
countries. There
is an unwillingness,
understandably. There's
language difficulties, and also
there is a
tradition. I mean, this is a
continent that
has lived under both Nazism and
communism,
and the willingness to let
authorities have
access to the metadata that we
have done in
this country with only limited
resistance
is a lot stronger there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Only so much the
U.S. can do,
David?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I think
there are two
issues here.
First, in Syria, I think we bear
a large responsibility.
I think we withdrew from Iraq
too quickly
and it created this tremendous
vacancy there
that ISIS filled. I think we
were too slow
to recognize what was going on
in Syria in
the civil war, refused to arm
people, refused
to take down Assad, ignored the
red line and
then created a vacuum which ISIS
then filled
there.
And so that's partly on us. The
European thing
-- I think that has nothing to
do with what
happened in Brussels. The
European thing,
as Mark said, it's a matter of
ideas and alienated
cultures. I lived in Brussels
for five years.
This was back in the '90s.
If you went to those
neighborhoods which are
a lot of Muslim people live
there, they were
isolated, they were different.
It was like
leaving Brussels and entering a
different
country, and there was just
little integration,
social, cultural, economic,
between those
areas and the rest of the
country and the
rest of the city.
And that sort of thing just
gestated, gestated,
gestated. And then when the
radical ideology
found -- they found a lot of
alienated people,
and they only have to tap a few
young men
to create something like this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some of the
criticism, Mark,
is that the administration has
just not put
enough emphasis on this. Yes,
the president
talks about it and, yes, there
have been a
number of limited troops,
special operations
troops, and there may be more
going over,
but it doesn't seem to be a
priority, enough
of a priority for this
president.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think the
president
can be accused legitimately of
not having
recognized the threat at the
outset. And I
think history will not be kind
to the drawing
of the red line in Syria, and
for the United
States.
But, A, the willingness of the
United States
for further action and
deployment of military,
even an all-volunteer military,
is severely
limited, Judy. And let's be very
frank. The
organizing principle of this was
the United
States' invasion of Iraq and the
United States'
occupation of Iraq. That remains
to this moment
the -- whether we left early,
should still
be there, the fact that we went
in, invaded
and occupied this country, and
it was a tragedy
and a disaster, and we have
reaped that whirlwind
and it remains with us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, even
criticism this
week of the optics. The
president was in Cuba
for this historic visit and
there were some
voices, well, he shouldn't have
gone to the
baseball game, he shouldn't have
gone on to
Argentina, how much does that
matter?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think those
criticisms
are unfounded.
The president -- we have a big
government.
We can do a lot of things at
once. If the
president had skipped the
baseball game and
gone home, what more could he
have done? He
has a telephone. He can make
decisions. He
can meetings.
It's my basic principle that's
just political
point-scoring. It's my most
fundamental basic
principle. There's never a good
reason to
miss a baseball game. And so his
decision
to do that, I fully support
that.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this was a
big one.
But, Mark...
MARK SHIELDS: I disagree. I do
think...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Really? OK.
MARK SHIELDS: I think optics do
matter.
I think the president could --
the baseball
game was probably the most
important event
emotionally and nationally
during his trip
to Cuba. I don't think he had to
be there
for the wave, when the crowd
stands up for
that. I don't think it's
necessary for him
to wear sunglasses and so -- he
could have
gone to the game and the rest.
Optics, a terrible word, do
matter, and if
you have any doubts about that,
virtually
every paper in the country,
certainly The
Wall Street Journal among them,
featured the
master as servant this week. On
Holy Thursday,
there was Pope Francis kissing
and washing
the feet of a refugee, a
penniless refugee.
That is a visual.
I agree with David the president
can do anything
anywhere he is, but if you were
sitting in
Brussels and worried about your
family or
your relatives or your
neighborhood, the picture
of him kind of grinning at the
game, I think,
was probably not helpful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it was
striking among some
of the reaction among the
Republican candidates
for president.
David, you had Ted Cruz saying,
what we need
to do is send more security into
patrolling
basically neighborhoods where
Muslim Americans
live.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I have spent
the last week
so repulsed by Donald Trump, I
had forgotten
how ugly Ted Cruz could be, but
he reminded
us this week.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: As I said and as
everyone says,
the reason we have terrorism is
not because
the Prophet Mohammed came down
and not because
there is a religion called
Islam.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
DAVID BROOKS: The reason we have
terror is
that young men are alienated and
feel they
can wage war and a just war
against societies
that are racist and xenophobic
and crushing
toward them.
And if you want to spread the
message, a good
way would be to have extra
police operations
directed at Muslim
neighborhoods. And so Ted
Cruz's idea is probably the
worst idea, well,
only of the day, because we have
a lot in
this campaign, truly terrible
idea, only saved
by the fact it's almost certain
he doesn't
actually believe it. He just
wants to sound
like Donald Trump.
MARK SHIELDS: I think David put
his finger
on it.
I would say this. It's ironic,
Judy, that
the Republican Party, to avoid
Donald Trump,
is rallying reluctantly, against
their own
will, around Ted Cruz. He
reminded them and
everybody else why they didn't
like him in
the first place. This is an
awful, awful position.
In fact, when the
Anti-Defamation League comes
out and compares it to the
imprisonment and
incarceration of Japanese
Americans during
World War II, when police
Commissioner Bill
Bratton in New York says he has
no idea what
he's talking about, there are a
thousand Muslim
Americans, many of them combat
veterans, on
the New York police force. It's
just -- it
was -- it's beyond stupid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that
occupied a lot of
the week, but something else
that occupied
a fair amount of time, at least
became a war
of words between the two leading
Republican
candidates, had to do with
women.
And we're going to take a
sidebar look at
that and then come back and talk
to both of
you.
Ted Cruz blasted his main rival,
Donald Trump,
today in Wisconsin.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Years from now, when my
daughters Google this,
they will read these lies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Cruz accused
Trump of being
behind tabloid accusations of
extramarital
affairs. It was the latest in
the escalating
war of words over women this
week between
the two candidates.
It all began with this ad, a
photo of Melania
Trump, a former model, posing
for "British
GQ" 16 years ago posted on
Facebook by an
anti-Trump super PAC ahead of
the Utah primary
caucuses Tuesday. Within hours,
Donald Trump
tweeted a response, wrongly
attributing the
ad directly to Cruz's campaign,
and warning
him to -- quote -- "be careful."
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Ted Cruz knowingly, in my
opinion, had this
article sent all over Utah, had
the picture
saying, is this want you want?
Essentially,
is this what you want for a
first lady? First
of all, she would be a great
first lady.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A fury in the
Twitterverse
ensued, as Cruz hit back,
defending his wife,
Heidi, and calling Trump a
coward.
A day later, Trump ratcheted up
the war of
the wives, when he retweeted an
unflattering
image of Mrs. Cruz. Polls show
Trump's standing
with women voters has worsened
in recent months.
According to the latest
Washington Post/ABC
News poll, 64 percent of women
say they have
a strongly unfavorable reaction
to him. That's
18 points higher than it was in
August.
So what do we say about this?
Did we ever
think this was going to be the
lead story
out of a campaign for president
of the United
States?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, that's the
first thing
I was going to say. Are we
really here? Is
this really happening? Is this
America? Are
we a great country talking about
trying to
straddle the world and create
opportunity
in this country?
It's just mind-boggling. And we
have sort
of become acculturated, because
this campaign
has been so ugly. We have become
acculturated
to sleaze and unhappiness that
you just want
to shower from every 15 minutes.
The Trump comparison of the
looks of the wives,
he does have, over the course of
his life,
a consistent misogynistic view
of women as
arm candy, as pieces of meat.
It's a consistent
attitude toward women which is
the stuff of
a diseased adolescent.
And so we have seen a bit of
that show up
again. But if you go back over
his past, calling
into radio shows bragging about
his affairs,
talking about his sex life in
public, he is
childish in his immaturity. And
his -- even
his misogyny is a childish
misogyny.
And that's why I do not think
Republicans,
standard Republicans, can say,
yes, I'm going
to vote for this guy because
he's our nominee.
He's of a different order than
your normal
candidate. And this whole week
is just another
reminder of that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Could this
finally be something,
Mark, that really does hurt
Donald Trump?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, we have
predicted nine
of his last eight stumbles, and
they have
yet to all materialize.
Judy, whoever did that political
action committee
ad has to be thrilled, because
it elicited
from Donald Trump the worst of
his personality,
the bullying, the misogyny, as
David has said,
brought it out.
But I think it's more than
childish and juvenile
and adolescent. There is
something creepy
about this, his attitude toward
women. Take
Megyn Kelly of FOX News, who he
just has an
absolute obsession about, and
he's constantly
writing about, you know, how
awful she is
and no talent and this and that.
It's an obsession.
And I don't know if he's just
never had women
-- strong, independent women in
his life who
have spoken to him. It doesn't
seem that way.
His daughter...
JUDY WOODRUFF: She has asked him
tough questions
in that debate.
MARK SHIELDS: She just asked him
tough questions
and was totally fair, by
everybody else's
standards.
But there is something really
creepy about
this that's beyond locker room.
It's almost
like a stalker, and I just -- I
thought this
was -- it actually did the
impossible. It
made Ted Cruz look like an
honorable, tough
guy on the right side of an
issue.
And, you know, I just -- I just
marvel at
it. And I don't know at what
point it becomes,
you know -- politically, he's
still leading.
And I would have to say he's the
overwhelming
favorite for the Republican
nomination.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what was
striking is that
this ad, David, which presumably
had very
limited circulation, might have
gone almost
unnoticed if it hadn't have been
for what
he -- how he reacted to it.
DAVID BROOKS: The odd thing
about his whole
career and his whole language,
his whole world
view is there is no room for
love in it.
You get a sense of a man who
received no love,
can give no love, so his
relationship with
women, it has no love in it.
It's trophy.
And his relationship toward the
world is one
of competition and beating, and
as if he's
going to win by competition what
other people
get by love.
And so you really are seeing
someone who just
has an odd psychology unleavened
by kindness
and charity, but where it's all
winners and
losers, beating and being beat.
And that's
part of the authoritarian
personality, but
it comes out in his attitude
towards women.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just 10
seconds.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I would say,
in his defense,
which I didn't think I would use
that phrase,
his relationship with his
children seems quite
good, with his daughter and with
his sons.
And they seem like -- they don't
seem like
malevolent people at all. They
seem like they're
very benevolent people.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Makes you wonder
what their
reaction is to all of this.
MARK SHIELDS: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks,
we thank you.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.
DAVID BROOKS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
deconstructing
strands of racism in America,
from white supremacists
to lone wolves; and remembering
two entertaining
greats, comedian Garry Shandling
and rapper
Malik Taylor, also known as
Phife Dawg.
But, first, poverty has had a
persistent grip
on Eastern Kentucky for
generations. Its residents
are poorer and less educated
than any other
region of Appalachia, and the
impact on health
is unmistakable. Life expectancy
there is
five years shorter than the rest
of the nation.
Special correspondent Jackie
Judd reports
on efforts to turn that around.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are a few
certainties
in Sam Wilson's hardscrabble
life, bluegrass
that sustains him, and cancer
that he expects
will kill him.
SAM WILSON, Cancer Sufferer: I
was laid up
with cancer and didn't know it,
in my bladder,
kidney, prostate, some in my
bowels and colon.
JACKIE JUDD: In Eastern
Kentucky, Appalachia,
cancer is epidemic, and has been
for decades.
The highest-in-the-nation rates
are fueled
by a toxic combination of
poverty, medical
illiteracy, limited access to
care, lifestyle
choices like smoking, and a
fatalism that
says knowing you have cancer
won't save you.
SAM WILSON: My whole family,
they just won't
go to the doctor anymore. My
mother died of
cancer and she wouldn't go. Two
of my sisters
died with cancer. But they went
to the doctor,
but they still passed away.
JACKIE JUDD: Irene, did you try
to convince
him to go to the doctor when he
wasn't feeling
well?
WOMAN: He finally told me after
a few years,
and he said, it's so painful,
something has
to be done.
JACKIE JUDD: After a few years?
Years?
WOMAN: Yes, he's very lucky,
yes.
JACKIE JUDD: Not months or
weeks, years?
WOMAN: No. No. What, about four
years maybe.
JACKIE JUDD: Kentucky public
health officials
are trying to change that
storyline, to get
people screened, so disease is
discovered
before it is too late to treat.
Tom Tucker is the director of
the Kentucky
Cancer Registry.
TOM TUCKER, Kentucky Cancer
Registry: The
old models for doing this, where
we tell people
that they need to do it, and
they're going
to go do it, well, that's
obviously not going
to work. So using other
strategies that are
culturally and socially
appropriate for the
population, that connect more
appropriately,
we are much more effective at
doing that now
than we were 10, 20, 30 years
ago.
Has anybody ever talked to you
about a colonoscopy?
JACKIE JUDD: About a decade ago,
health officials
trained their sights on colon
cancer. And
within seven years, screenings
doubled and
deaths declined 24 percent
statewide. Part
of the strategy is to reach
people where they
live.
TOM COLLINS, Rural Prevention
Cancer Center:
When's the last time you seen a
doctor?
MAN: Long time.
TOM COLLINS: Yes?
MAN: The only time I go is if a
bone is sticking
out or if I got to be sewed up.
JACKIE JUDD: Tom Collins with
the Rural Prevention
Cancer Center sets up shop in
the county unemployment
office, sweetening the deal with
his homemade
pies. About half of the people
he corrals
either leave with a home
test-kit or agree
to get colonoscopies.
TOM COLLINS: The challenge is
educating them
that they can do something about
it, and that
I can help them do something
about it. You
don't have to get cancer.
JACKIE JUDD: The state
legislature passed
a law last year requiring
insurance companies
to cover colonoscopies.
But Debra Burchett (ph) had no
insurance and
no way to pay for a screening,
even though
she was having symptoms. Then,
her doctor
told her the county had begun
offering free
screenings for people in her
situation. That
probably saved her life.
And what was diagnosed?
WOMAN: Colon cancer, stage four.
JACKIE JUDD: So if you had not
found the free
program, would you not have
gotten the colonoscopy?
WOMAN: Probably not. I probably
wouldn't be
here today.
JACKIE JUDD: Another piece of
this success
story is Polly Gilbert and other
lay health
workers, who are known in the
community and
trusted.
Gilbert travels hundreds of
miles a week,
visiting people in their homes,
educating
them about preventive care and
steering them
to the proper services.
POLLY GILBERT, Health Worker:
Hi. What's going
on today?
JACKIE JUDD: So they will listen
to you in
ways that they may not listen to
a doctor.
POLLY GILBERT: Sometimes they
do, and we have
been able to sway them: "Well,
Polly says
I need to come," and not just
because I'm
such an influence, but I make
them -- they're
part of my family.
JACKIE JUDD: In the past couple
of years,
the increase in the number of
people getting
screened for colon cancer has
plateaued. Even
the trusted Gilbert runs into
resistance,
as she does with Sam Wilson's
wife, Irene.
You have never had a
colonoscopy?
WOMAN: No, I haven't.
JACKIE JUDD: Why?
WOMAN: Well, I guess because I
haven't had
any symptoms or anything.
JACKIE JUDD: Public health
officials are now
tackling another disease that is
devastating
to the region. The incidence of
lung cancer
is Almost double here compared
to the national
average. Deaths are almost
double. The challenge
is to not only encourage certain
lifelong
smokers to get screened, but to
get them to
quit, and for others to never
start.
It will be even more difficult
than changing
the profile of colon cancer,
because smoking
involves addiction.
JERRY BURCHETT, Kentucky: I have
been smoking
since I was probably 8 years
old. Back in
those days in this part of the
country, it
was nothing for kids to smoke.
It was acceptable.
JACKIE JUDD: Longtime public
health worker
Becky Simpson hopes schools will
begin using
this anti-smoking program, even
for kids as
young as 10 or 11. Years ago,
conversations
like this never would have
happened.
BECKY SIMPSON, Public Health
Worker: I could
not talk about it unless I had
permission.
JACKIE JUDD: Why?
BECKY SIMPSON: Because we didn't
want to anger
the people that we were working
with. Tobacco
was the cash crop. It was the
way people made
a living. And so it just was not
OK to try
and tell people don't smoke,
because that
was how people made their
living.
JACKIE JUDD: How many of the
patients who
you treat are typically from
Eastern Kentucky?
DR. SUSANNE ARNOLD, Markey
Cancer Center:
We have about 50 to 70 percent.
JACKIE JUDD: Oncologist and
researcher Susanne
Arnold at the Markey Cancer
Center in Lexington
is investigating how to get
screening numbers
up in rural Kentucky, as well as
looking at
causes of lung cancer which may
be unique
to the region.
DR. SUSANNE ARNOLD: There's got
to be more
to it than just a little bit
more smoking
in that community, that causes
this gigantic
increase in lung cancer rates.
And the reasons
for that are probably, we don't
clear carcinogens
as well as the next group, we
don't process
tobacco as well, so we have a
higher drive
for more nicotine and we smoke
more.
We maybe don't repair our DNA as
well as other
populations, and DNA damage is
at the heart
of cancer incidence.
JACKIE JUDD: Dr. Arnold sees
progress battling
cancer, but progress slowed by
poverty and
fiercely held custom.
Do you encounter what I would
call that fatalism?
DR. SUSANNE ARNOLD: Yes, I do.
And I'm struck
by it, because it means that
these people
have been devastated, and they
have been devastated
over and over and over again, by
not having
anybody to reach out to help
them. Ultimately,
we don't want people to lose
hope.
JACKIE JUDD: The hope of public
health officials
is that the model used to bring
down colon
cancer deaths can be used to the
same effect,
not only for lung cancer, but
for other diseases
plaguing this depressed swathe
of America.
As for Sam Wilson, he so wishes
he had not
ignored his health. He says,
he's been sick
so long now, he almost forgets
what it means
to feel better.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Jackie Judd
in Campton, Kentucky.
SAM WILSON (singing): For
letting me live
just one more day.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Klux Klan and
other white
supremacist groups have gained
more attention
in the news recently, but as
special correspondent
Charlayne Hunter-Gault explains,
the national
undercurrent of racism may be
even more pervasive.
It's part of our yearlong
exploration of solutions
to the problems of race in
America.
These are boots that are
intended so that,
when you stomp on someone, the
swastika will
be left.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Heidi
Beirich is leader
of The Intelligence Project here
at the Southern
Poverty Law Center, a nonprofit
anti-terror
organization.
She shows us memorabilia
revealing some Ku
Klux Klan history, boots with
swastikas and
boots with red laces, indicating
Klan members
who've physically harmed
someone, and other
racist paraphernalia. In 2014,
there were
some 784 active hate groups.
Beirich brings
us up to date.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: The Ku
Klux Klan has
declined over the years, in part
due to lawsuits
that you people here at the
Southern Poverty
Law Center have filed. Briefly
tell us about
how that came about.
HEIDI BEIRICH, Southern Poverty
Law Center:
We started filing lawsuits
against the Klan
in 1981 over a lynching of a
young black man
in Mobile. That was our first
anti-Klan law
suit.
And we came up with this idea
that we should
sue these folks in civil court
to bankrupt
them. That was the plan. We have
now had a
series of Klan groups that we
have sued, put
them basically out of business,
leading all
the way up to very recently with
the Imperial
Klans of America. Our hope is
that by taking
their money away, they can't
function anymore.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And that
was successful?
HEIDI BEIRICH: Yes. Every single
one of them
has been successful. Obviously,
when these
groups don't have money, that
means there's
less violence that they could
perpetrate.
The whole idea is to not allow
them to function.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But at
the moment,
there seems to be a resurgence
and what appears
to be a rise in hate groups.
What explains
that?
HEIDI BEIRICH: We have seen a
sustained rise
in hate groups since basically
2000. And the
main thing driving this has been
changing
demographics in the United
States.
2000 was an important year
because it was
the first time that the U.S.
census said definitively,
in our near future, 2042 at the
time, whites
will no longer be the majority.
And obviously,
if you are a member of a hate
group, right,
if you're a white supremacist,
the fact that
whites will be less than 50
percent of the
population is something to
basically be a
little freaked out about.
And so we started to see them
organizing by
hate groups and huge growth,
spiked over 1,000
hate groups in a short period of
time. Obama
added to that, right? Obviously,
the first
black president was another
reason for a backlash
like that to develop.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And
you're getting
that from former Klans-people
and former white
supremacists who are telling you
that?
HEIDI BEIRICH: You always hear
exactly the
same thing, whether people are
in the movement
or out of the movement.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Is it
mostly hatred
of African-Americans or is there
more to it?
HEIDI BEIRICH: Hatred of black
people is the
driving force for America's hate
movement.
But, over the years, as you have
seen a change
in sort of the population of
people of color
here, you can add to that mix
dislike of Latinos
and immigrants, dislike of gay
people and,
very recently, we have seen a
huge outburst
by every kind of hate group
against the Muslim
community.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You have
also described
in some of your writings about a
new phenomenon
called the lone wolf, which is
different from
organized groups. How
significant and worrisome
is that?
HEIDI BEIRICH: Well, you're
pointing out one
of the biggest trends in terms
of racist killings
that we're seeing lately.
We have people like Dylann Roof,
who killed
nine people in Charleston. Our
understanding
of Dylann Roof, from his own
manifesto, is
he never met a person in another
hate group
in his life. He was completely
radicalized
online.
That's exactly the same
phenomenon that we
see, for example, for people who
are inspired
by ISIS. They go onto Web sites
where there's
propaganda that's widely
available. It enrages
them for some reason. That kind
of lone wolf
terrorism is a big problem, and
there's more
of it today than it was 10 years
ago, and
we don't expect that to change.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Can you
use any of
the tactics that you used to
decimate the
Klan in this new era?
HEIDI BEIRICH: These people live
on the Web,
like many people do for all
kinds of reasons.
The only way for law enforcement
to really
find them and track them is to
follow them
onto the hate Web sites. And
it's not easy.
How did Dylann Roof indicate
that he was going
to go on a mass shooting spree?
He didn't.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, are
there any
solutions, though, for people
who -- around
the country who are concerned
about these
issues?
HEIDI BEIRICH: The Department of
Justice has
reconstituted a domestic
terrorism task force
that had been defunct since 9/11
to start
collecting intelligence
aggressively against
white supremacists and extreme
anti-government
types. That's a very important
thing to do.
What we try to do here is
publish information
about these people, where they
are, what groups
they're involved in, what
they're publishing,
so that at least law
enforcement, which is
the big readership for our
products, knows
where they are, what they
believe, what they
think, so they have a chance to
maybe catch
someone before they escalate.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: How much
does education
add to a solution?
HEIDI BEIRICH: It's probably the
biggest solution.
And we know from talking to
people who are
racist today that it has a lot
to do with
what you learn in the home.
If it's not counteracted in some
way, right,
deep racial hatred, you just --
you don't
learn any differently. We have a
lot of people
who come to us after stints, for
example,
in prison for crimes committed
with white
supremacy in some way who meet
people of other
races. That's a place where you
could intervene
with younger people too and
bring them out
of movement.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And you
have seen
that happen?
HEIDI BEIRICH: Many, many times.
One of my favorite examples is a
woman named
Angela King. who went to prison
in Florida
for involvement with a white
supremacist skinhead
crew. They committed some
robberies. She met
a Jamaican woman who was
involved -- who was
imprisoned with her, but was
involved in some
community activities in the
prison there.
They became friends. That's how
Angie got
out of the movement, was through
that relationship.
For the first time in her life,
she had an
honest friendship, right, with a
person of
a different color. Now Angela
King runs something
called Life After Hate, which
works with people
who wants to get out of white
supremacist
movements.
And what we try to do is bust up
the groups.
We try to sow discord among the
organizations,
show that the people who lead
these organizations
are hypocrites and so on, to
give people a
chance to look at what they have
gotten involved
in and maybe reconsider it.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And you
have seen
that work?
HEIDI BEIRICH: It absolutely
works.
The number one thing, I would
say, that drives
people out of hate groups is
seeing their
leadership corrupt.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Looking
to the future
and the things that you do, are
you at all
optimistic that your
organization and America
in general can get its arms
around hate and
racism?
HEIDI BEIRICH: I'm optimistic in
the long
run, and I'm extremely
pessimistic in the
short run.
Some of the racial strife that
we have been
experiencing over the last year
are all related
to our inability to digest the
fact that this
country is changing and white
people are not
going to be the majority here.
Right?
I think, in the long term,
everything in the
United States may be amazing.
Right? We might
be the first truly
multicultural, multiethnic
democracy that embraces
tolerance everywhere.
We would be the first if we
sustain this transition
in the 2050s without having
things descend
into chaos.
But we're going to have to get
through a rough
patch. We really have to work on
this issue.
It's fundamental to our
democracy working.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Heidi
Beirich, thank
you so much for joining us.
HEIDI BEIRICH: It was a
pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
we note the
passing this week of two
groundbreaking artists
of the entertainment world.
Jeffrey Brown has our
remembrance.
JEFFREY BROWN: In his first
influential sitcom,
Garry Shandling would break
character and
speak directly to the audience.
GARRY SHANDLING, Actor: I feel
like I'm on
Gilligan's Island. I can't get
off this date.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHNNY CARSON, "The Tonight
Show": Would you
welcome Garry Shandling?
JEFFREY BROWN: He'd started in
stand-up, and
been a fill-in host for Johnny
Carson. And
in 1992, he created his own mock
late-night
show, "The Larry Sanders Show,"
that subverted
the form.
ALEC BALDWIN, Actor: Well,
actually, Larry,
you and I have something in
common.
GARRY SHANDLING: Yes? Yes, we
do.
(LAUGHTER)
GARRY SHANDLING: A lot of you
probably don't
know that Alec and I -- well,
Alec used to
actually date my ex-wife,
Francine.
ALEC BALDWIN: No, I was
referring to our charity
work with multiple sclerosis.
(LAUGHTER)
GARRY SHANDLING: I know.
JEFFREY BROWN: He pioneered a
kind of meta-humor
and both featured, and
influenced, a generation
of up-and-coming comedians.
Earlier this year, Sanders
joined his friend
Jerry Seinfeld on his Web series
"Comedians
in Cars Getting Coffee," where
they discussed
the impact of "The Larry Sanders
Show."
JERRY SEINFELD, Comedian: You
ever watch TV,
"The Office," "Modern Family,"
and go, oh,
look, they're still doing me?
They're still
doing that thing I invented?
GARRY SHANDLING: I knew when I
explained to
HBO what I wanted to do, I
couldn't say, it's
a little bit of this show and a
little bit
of that show. I couldn't even do
that. And
I mean, they thought I was
crazy.
JEFFREY BROWN: Among many
others, last night,
Conan O'Brien recalled
Shandling's personal
kindness.
CONAN O'BRIEN, Host, "Conan": He
was also
extremely sensitive. He was
complicated, and
he had a ton of empathy for
other people.
And I want to make that point.
That is something
in the business, in comedy, that
is very rare.
He really did care about other
people.
JEFFREY BROWN: Garry Shandling
died of an
apparent heart attack in Los
Angeles yesterday.
He was 66.
Another innovator who helped
reshape his artistic
landscape was Malik Taylor,
better known as
Phife Dawg. He and childhood
friend, Jonathan,
AKA Q-Tip, helped found the
seminal hip-hop
group A Tribe Called Quest,
known for its
socially-conscious lyrics and
innovative music.
MICHAEL RAPAPORT,
Actor/Director: For a lot
of people, A Tribe Called Quest
was our Beatles,
our Rolling Stones, our Led
Zeppelin.
JEFFREY BROWN: The group was the
subject of
a 2011 documentary called
"Beats, Rhymes and
Life" by actor and director
Michael Rapaport,
who spoke with us via Skype.
MICHAEL RAPAPORT: When Q-Tip and
Phife were
in sync, it was as good as
anything. It was
as good as your favorite piece
of pizza, the
best glass of wine.
JEFFREY BROWN: The group's 1991
album "Low
End Theory" fused hip-hop and
jazz, and along
with "Midnight Marauders,"
influenced a generation
of rappers and producers.
PHARRELL WILLIAMS, Musician: We
wouldn't be
here, man, if it wasn't like for
Tribe albums.
You got it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Phife Dawg died
of complications
with diabetes. He was 45 years
old.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tune in later
this evening.
On "Washington Week," Gwen Ifill
and her panelists
will have a breakdown of the
week's big news"
-- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Judy.
We will pick up where you left
off, providing
reporting and analysis on the
European terror
crisis, the president's
history-making trip
to Cuba, and this completely
unpredictable
and consequential presidential
campaign, with
reporters from The New York
Times, The Daily
Beast, NPR, and The Washington
Post. That's
tonight on "Washington Week" --
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We look forward,
Gwen.
And Alison Stewart has a preview
of what's
coming up on tomorrow's edition
of "PBS NewsHour
Weekend."
ALISON STEWART: On the next "PBS
NewsHour
Weekend": Workers and businesses
struggle
to strike a balance between
wages and tips.
WOMAN: There are Sundays the
tips are amazing.
But then there's other days that
I'm making
nothing.
ALISON STEWART: On the next "PBS
NewsHour
Weekend."
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.